Libraries test new paths in measured re-openings
ByTresca Weinstein
Aug. 11, 2020
Updated: Aug. 11, 2020 3:52 p.m.

A staffer works on a shelving and weeding project at the Pine Hills Branch earlier this summer. Since the buildings are closed to the public right now, staff are spending some time getting the vast collections in tip-top shape. Credit: Albany Public Library
1
of
9
A staffer works on a shelving and weeding project at the Pine Hills Branch earlier this summer. Since the buildings are closed to the public right now, staff are spending some time getting the vast collections in tip-top shape. Credit: Albany Public Library

Albany Public Library
Two staff members at the Washington Ave. Branch sort and prepare new books to be added to the collection. Many publishers delayed printing and shipping books this spring due to the pandemic. APL is receiving many shipments now and is catching up on the backlog. (credit: Albany Public Library)
2
of
9
Two staff members at the Washington Ave. Branch sort and prepare new books to be added to the collection. Many publishers delayed printing and shipping books this spring due to the pandemic. APL is receiving many shipments now and is catching up on the backlog. (credit: Albany Public Library)

Albany Public Library
Kinderhook Memorial Library (Provided)
3
of
9
Kinderhook Memorial Library (Provided)

Provided
If there’s one message that libraries around the region have received loud and clear during the past five months, it’s this: Their patrons like them. They really, really like them. And they’ve missed them more than they can say.

“Our takeaway has been that the library is so much more than the books,” said AnnaLee Dragon, director of the Kinderhook Memorial Library, who recently found the words “We miss our librarians” written in sidewalk chalk outside the building. “Especially in a small town like ours, the library is like a community center—a place people go regularly to socialize, a place they’ve always been welcome.”


As they advance cautiously through the stages of reopening, each in their own time, libraries are getting creative in serving patrons as safely and effectively as possible—from remote resumé help to outdoor storytimes to curbside pickup with “concierge service,” as librarians customize orders to readers’ tastes (“A dozen books about dinosaurs driving trucks for a 4-year-old? We can do that!”). The Kinderhook Memorial Library created its first ever Story Walk, posting laminated pages from Alice Schertle’s “Little Blue Truck” on neighbors’ lawns and providing a map for families to follow through the village from page one to The End.

“People are so grateful,” said Evelyn Neale, director of the William K. Sanford Town Library in Colonie, which on June 15 began allowing patrons indoors to browse or use computers by appointment—the first library in the region to do so. “As they come in, they’re saying, ‘Thank you for being here, we really missed you.’ Is it a risk? Can it be scary? Sure, but it’s worth it. It’s what we do.”

Safety in the stacks

“I never thought, in 20 years in public libraries, that part of my job would be to look at infection rates every morning, but that’s where we’re at as an organization,” said Scott Jarzombek, director of the Albany Public Library (APL). An adjunct professor at SUNY Albany, he has been consulting closely throughout this time with faculty in the College of Emergency Preparedness, Homeland Security and Cybersecurity. APL is quarantining returned materials for up to 96 hours (other libraries do the same), and Jarzombek has set up groups of employees who don’t overlap hours, so that confirmed or possible infections among staff won’t close branches down.

At the Sanford Library, greeters at the door ensure that visitors are wearing masks and sanitizing hands as they enter; 15 browsers at a time can spend half an hour in the stacks, while computer appointments last one hour.

“Fifteen people in this space is very few people for a very large space”—3,300 square feet after a recent renovation, Neale said. “We’ve put away all the tables and chairs—nobody can sit or stay, and it also gives people room to space themselves out. They have been very respectful and very conscious of the 6-foot distance.” She’s been able to bring back about 25 of her 55 staff, most of whom had been furloughed early on.

Even as they move forward, libraries are planning to continue and even expand online programming established during the early days of the pandemic, including trivia nights, book discussions and story hours.



“Virtual programming and meetings are going to be a part of life, at least for libraries, for an extended amount of time, even when we’ve reached a new normal,” Jarzombek said. “We’ve been building toward virtual anyway—that’s why we were able to pivot so quickly. With people’s schedules, it’s hard to be part of [in-person] storytimes and book clubs.”

What they’re reading now

While e-book borrowing, not surprisingly, has risen steeply—Albany libraries saw a 41 percent increase in July—circulation of tangible materials has been higher than expected since libraries began offering by-appointment curbside pickup earlier this summer. Jarzombek says APL sent out over four thousand items to some 1,400 people in the first four weeks of curbside, which started in July at the Bach and Delaware branches. On August 4, APL launched curbside service at three additional branches (Arbor Hill/West Hill, Howe and Pine Hills)—and had only one no-show despite the tropical storm that hit the city that day.

“Physical books are the only way we’re unplugging right now, and in times like this, that’s more important than ever,” said Jarzombek, who prefers hard copy himself (dystopian fiction in normal times, mysteries since March). “People like going to their library—even if it’s just curbside delivery, it’s getting out of the house and doing something. They’re looking for interaction.”

Circulation at the Sanford Library is “through the roof, considering all the circumstances working against us,” Neale noted. That translates to about 50 percent of typical borrowing rates at this time of year—35,000 items last month vs. 70,000 in July 2019.

“People like being able to browse and choose their own materials,” she said. “They have more access to DVDs and music, and they can take out more materials when they come in to browse vs. what we’re able to accommodate via curbside.” (Her personal choices: mystery and humor, usually on audiobook.)

“Librarians always get the question, ‘What do we need libraries for, because we have the internet?’ Neale said. “So we’ve gone out of our way [in the past] to do other things—expand programming, trainings, outreach. But when push came to shove and the world was in crisis, what people looked to us for was materials, whether digital or the most recent best-seller. We’re back to basics.”


The Kinderhoook Memorial Library, which recently went fine free, has loaned out about a thousand items since opening for curbside about six weeks ago. “I have noticed patrons borrowing a lot of escapist fiction, whether that is thrillers or comedies,” says Dragon, who has been gravitating toward true crime and light fiction for herself. “I’ve also seen a definite uptick in nonfiction books about social change. It’s heartening to see the desire to focus on what can be done to improve our world at a time when we feel like so much is out of our control. The best part about a great book is its ability to transport us mentally and emotionally, but also to awaken our inner empathy.”

The next chapter

Dragon is considering setting up outdoor browsing tables and checkout, to give people more autonomy in their choices: “Browsing is the one thing I can’t replicate with curbside.” She’s hoping to start indoor appointments as cold weather kicks in, particularly because Columbia County has “the worst broadband in the state,” she said. The library’s Wi-Fi usage has gone up, with locals invited to log on in the reading garden or in their cars nearby; they can also borrow laptops. “We’re doing whatever we can to help patrons feel more connected,” Dragon said.

Neale is in “wait, watch and see” mode, holding off on making indoor reading and study areas available until she sees how reopening of schools and other libraries proceeds. As for APL, all buildings remained closed as of Aug. 10; Jarzombek says the first branches to open will be locations with updated HVAC systems, HEPA filters, higher ceilings and doors and windows that can be opened to optimize airflow.

“We have a really good plan in place, that changes almost every week. I’ve been really clear that this is not step and then step and then step, it’s moving forward and backwards. There are libraries that are way ahead of us, and we are watching on the sidelines and seeing how things work out for them,” he said, noting that the zip codes APL serves are the highest COVID-impacted ZIP codes in the region.

“We’re going to get back to the library being the place we love,” he added. “Pandemics don’t last forever, but the length of them is always based on the behavior of people. With 130-plus staff and 68,000 cardholders, we can set an example.”
